JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On tonight's "NewsHour": a major
shakeup in the Republican Party
in Congress. The speaker
of the House, John Boehner,
resigns. We explore what it
means for politics and policy.
Also ahead: Pope Francis at the
United Nations calls for peace,
justice and protecting the
environment.
Then, with climate change and
cyber-security at the forefront,
China's president visits
the White House.
And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here to
analyze a full week of news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On this day, when
a pope and two presidents were
already making headlines,
a surprise resignation came
along to stun Washington.
We begin with the announcement
that the speaker of the United
States House of Representatives
is stepping down.
"NewsHour" political director
Lisa Desjardins reports.
REP. JOHN BOEHNER (R-OH),
Speaker of the House (singing):
Zip-a-dee-doo-dah, my, oh, my,
what a wonderful day.
LISA DESJARDINS: With his
decision, House Speaker John
Boehner, the happy warrior,
projected
a kind of personal relief and
institutional sacrifice.
REP. JOHN BOEHNER: It's become
clear to me that this prolonged
leadership turmoil would
do irreparable harm to the
institution. So, this morning, I
informed my colleagues that
I would resign from the
speakership and resign from
Congress at the end of October.
Now,
as you have often heard me
say, this isn't about me.
LISA DESJARDINS: In fact, it had
become about him, at least in
part. Boehner was again under
fire from Tea Party Republicans
pushing to defund Planned
Parenthood, even if it means
closing the government. They'd
threatened a floor vote to try
to strip him of the speakership.
REP. JOHN BOEHNER: There was
never any doubt about whether I
could survive the vote, but
I don't want my members to
have to go through this.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Ohio
Republican said he'd planned to
resign at the end of this
year anyway, after five years as
speaker and midway through his
13th term.
But his bombshell left House
supporters lamenting their loss.
REP. STEVE STIVERS (R), Ohio: I
think he has always been the
adult in the room and tried
to do what he thinks is right,
even if it is not in his best
political interest.
LISA DESJARDINS: Boehner's
counterpart in the Senate,
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell,
praised the speaker's legacy.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: He is an ally;
he's a friend. And he took
over as Republican leader at a
very difficult time for his
party.
LISA DESJARDINS: At the White
House, the nation's top Democrat
offered his own measured praise
for a man who'd opposed
most of his agenda.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: He is somebody
who has been gracious, and
I think, maybe most importantly,
he's somebody who understands
that, in government, in
governance,
you don't always get 100
percent of what you want.
LISA DESJARDINS: But at a
conservative summit in
Washington, when Senator Marco
Rubio brought
up the speaker:
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: Just a
few minutes ago, Speaker Boehner
announced
that he will be resigning.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS:
The crowd cheered.
Back at the Capitol, House
Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi
called the resignation seismic
and symbolic of problems
in Boehner's party.
REP. NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader: That
resignation of the speaker is a
stark
indication of the disarray of
the House Republicans, a
demonstration of their obsession
with shutting
down government at the
expense of women's health.
LISA DESJARDINS: Now, the focus
turns to the new Republican
leadership races, with Boehner's
number two, Kevin McCarthy of
California, an early candidate
to replace him as speaker.
Many, like Georgia's Lynn
Westmoreland, are contemplating
whether to run for other
leadership
spots, but are unsure what
the changes will mean.
Do you think a different speaker
would produce a different
outcome for House Republicans?
REP. LYNN WESTMORELAND (R),
Georgia: No, I think the outcome
is going to be the same.
LISA DESJARDINS: The leadership
elections are expected to take
place November 1.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will get more
insight into what drove
Boehner's decision and how it's
being received in just a moment.
Meanwhile, in other news,
recriminations set in after the
deadly stampede in Saudi Arabia
that left at least 719 Muslim
pilgrims crushed to death. It
happened yesterday at Mina, just
outside Mecca, where more than
two million people are taking
part in the annual Islamic
pilgrimage known as the hajj.
Lindsey Hilsum of Independent
Television News has our report.
LINDSEY HILSUM: King Salman of
Saudi Arabia received pilgrims'
representatives at his
palace in Mina today.
He talked of Arab and Islamic
unity and of preventing hidden
hands from causing mischief
in Muslim lands. Not all the
faithful will accept that.
Amateur video shot yesterday
shows emergency workers amongst
piles of bodies. Other footage
shows people waiting to enter
the Jamarat yesterday. One gate
is opened, the crowd presses in
the danger is obvious.
Dissident voices say there's
little chance of a transparent
investigation. That's just
not the Saudi government's
priority. In Tehran, they were
protesting about the 131
Iranians
who were killed in Mina. "Death
to the Saudi monarchy," she
shouted, but this grief is
orchestrated, not spontaneous.
Shiite Iran is Sunni Saudi
Arabia's sectarian and regional
rival.
The governments sponsor opposing
forces in Syria and Yemen.
Yesterday's tragedy will
fuel antagonism and political
strife. Today, a official
pictures showed a calm scene a
that Jamarat, while pilgrims
carried out the ritual stoning
of the devil. Some two million
Muslims are staying in the
massive city of air-conditioned
tents in Mina.
The Saudis have talked of
increasing the number next year.
Now the pilgrims will move
towards
Mecca, despite the danger, the
acrimony and the grief for those
who lost their lives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Saudi officials
say they expect the death toll
to rise, as they continue
counting
bodies.
The head of soccer's world body,
FIFA, President Sepp Blatter,
now faces a criminal
investigation
for alleged corruption.
Authorities in Switzerland
interrogated Blatter today and
searched his
office. U.S. and Swiss officials
announced in May they're looking
into corruption at
the sport's highest levels.
After that, Blatter said he will
step down early next year.
In Europe's migrant crisis, the
prime minister of Hungary
promised today to consult with
neighboring states before
closing his border with Croatia.
But Hungary also neared
completion
of a fence on that border, where
thousands have crossed in recent
days. Thousands more
are crossing Serbia to get to
Croatia. A top European official
was there today to witness
the influx firsthand.
JOHANNES HAHN, European
Commission: It's a global
problem, and we can only give a
European
answer. It's not something where
we can leave only one country
with itself to resolve the
problem. This problem can only
be managed if we are all working
together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, there
was trouble in Finland, where
dozens of protesters threw
stones and set off fireworks at
a bus carrying foreign asylum
seekers. The government
condemned
the violence.
Back in the U.S., the
Environmental Protection Agency
announced auto emissions testing
is
going to get more stringent.
EPA's head of air quality said
the agency wants to know
if other automakers also cheated
on the tests, as Volkswagen has
admitted doing. The head
of V.W. has resigned, and today,
Matthias Mueller, who now runs
V.W.'s Porsche unit,
was named the company's new CEO.
California today reimposed the
United States' toughest carbon
emission standard. It mandates
cutting transportation fuel
emissions by 10 percent within
five years. And it counts the
pollution generated by producing
the fuel, as well as by driving.
The issue's been on
hold since 2009 because
of legal challenges.
And on Wall Street, stocks had
an up and down day. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
113 points to close near 16315.
The Nasdaq fell 48 points, and
the S&P 500 slipped one
point. For the week, the Dow
lost a fraction of a percent,
the Nasdaq fell nearly 3
percent,
and the S&P shed 1.5 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what Speaker Boehner's
resignation means for the future
of Congress; Pope Francis' call
for peace and justice at the
U.N.; climate and cyber-security
top China's president's visit to
the White House; Shields and
Brooks analyze the week's
news, and much more.
We return now to the resignation
of House Speaker John Boehner
and how it's seen by
the most conservative
members of the House.
A short time ago, I spoke with
Republican Congressman Reid
Ribble of Wisconsin.
Representative Ribble,
welcome to the "NewsHour."
You were part of a small group
of conservative House members
who met with Speaker Boehner
yesterday. Was his resignation
a result of that meeting?
REP. REID RIBBLE (R),
Wisconsin: Oh, not at all.
In fact, that whole idea didn't
even come up in the meeting. All
of us were quite surprised
this morning. Even Kevin
McCarthy mentioned that he was
told only moments before. And
so, it caught us all off-guard.
The resignation or the speaker's
position wasn't part of our
discussion with the
speaker yesterday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think this
is a good thing for the House of
Representatives?
REP. REID RIBBLE: Certainly,
there has been a lot of concern
about maintaining the status
quo here.
I personally thought the speaker
was doing a pretty good job
trying to manage the very
diverse opinions within this
conference. There's 247
Republicans, and they span the
political
breadth of Republicanism in this
country. And it's difficult to
get them all to agree
on a particular
tactic or strategy.
And so I felt pretty good about
how the speaker was trying to
advance our principles, but,
clearly, there was
some dissatisfaction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there has
been rejoicing among many
conservatives. We know there was
a standing ovation at the Values
Voters Summit gathering. We know
a number of the conservative
House members have said they
think this is a good thing.
I guess my question is, you're
still dealing with a Democratic
president. The Senate is
a different place from the
House. How do conservatives in
the Republican Caucus get what
they want
now? How is it going to be
any different or any better?
REP. REID RIBBLE: You know, I
think the one thing that
conservatives are going to ask
for is a more strict
adherence to regular order.
I think we often accept not
getting our perfect solution
when we feel we have been part
of
the process, that the process
itself has been followed
correctly, that members have a
chance
to offer amendments to bills
that come to the floor. I think
those were some of the
things that were
creating some anxiety.
But the reality is, as you just
mentioned, we do have a
Democratic president, we don't
have a supermajority in the
Senate, and so we're going to
try to advance a conservative
agenda forward through the
House, and we will just see what
Mitch McConnell can do over
in the Senate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this a win,
though, right now for House
conservatives?
REP. REID RIBBLE: Well, I don't
know that -- I don't know that
any of us -- I suppose
there are some that would say
it's a win. I'm not necessarily
looking at it as a win.
But I do know this, that every
single time that you change
somebody in leadership -- I
know this happened in my company
before I came to Congress and
now -- when you have
a chance to change some people,
you shake up the status quo, you
force us to look at
things through maybe a little
different lens and different
prism. And so we might end up
with a different result.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is our
understanding, though, that,
right now, the thing that
conservatives
wanted most, and that is for
Planned Parenthood not to be
funded, is not going to happen,
that there apparently is going
to be an agreement that it will
be funded for the time being.
So how is that a positive in
the mind of conservatives?
REP. REID RIBBLE: Yes.
Well, I think there's a couple
things -- I think there's a
couple of very fluid dynamics
going on. First of all, a couple
of the major national
right-to-life organizations have
asked members of Congress like
myself not to shut down the
government over the funding
of Planned Parenthood, but to
continue to try to make the case
for the American people,
so that you can win the hearts
and minds of the American
people.
I thought the pope spoke out
forcibly yesterday and
forcefully on the issue of
pro-life, where
he said that we should respect
life at every stage of
development. And so I think
there's
still some seizing that goes on.
We have another bite at this
apple in December, when we do
the full funding for the year.
We have some opportunity to --
again to expose the practices of
Planned Parenthood in the
next 60 days. So, we will see
what happens from there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Representative
Reid Ribble of Wisconsin, we
thank you.
REP. REID RIBBLE: You're very
welcome. It's good to be with
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, for more,
let's turn to our political
director, Lisa Desjardins, whom
we have heard from just a moment
ago. She is now on Capitol Hill.
So, Lisa, is there anything more
we need to understand about why
Boehner did this right
now?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, I think
that one major factor, Judy, was
the meeting that Representative
Ribble was in yesterday with
some of the most conservative
members of the House.
My understanding is that they
let the speaker know that they
were going to make their move
against him, they were going to
call a vote basically
questioning his speakership on
the
floor of the House, and that
that essentially sparked
Boehner's decision to resign,
rather
than force that vote. He
mentioned that today, and I
think that's exactly why this is
happening
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You gave us a
sense in your report of what the
reaction is. I mean, overall,
shock, surprise, disappointment,
a mixture? What?
LISA DESJARDINS: Very surprised
from all corners, even from
those conservatives who were
trying
to push back at Boehner.
But I think there is certainly a
very stark difference in
reaction between Boehner
supporters,
which may even be the majority
of his conference. Some of them
are frankly outraged, Judy. You
could hear even just asking
questions about other things on
the phone to some of their
supporters today how mad
and bitter they are.
They're worried that a minority
of their conference is using
these hard tactics to push out,
they
think, strong leadership. But
then, from conservatives, there
is more of a sense of relief and
a sense
of hope. But what there is not,
I don't think, from anyone, Judy
-- and it's notable -- is
a sense of exactly what the
long-term plan is here, how this
caucus that remains divided
governs, especially, as you
asked Representative Ribble,
with a Democratic president and
a
Senate that doesn't have enough
votes to pass controversial
legislation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, do you --
what's your understanding that
conservatives think is
going to change, is going to be
better? You heard Representative
Ribble say, well, there's
going to be more
following regular order.
I think most people don't
understand what that means.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
What that means is that most --
that they're hoping that
conservatives will be able to
put more amendments on the floor
and at least get up-or-down
votes on their ideas. They
think that there perhaps weren't
enough votes recently on
different versions of defunding
Obamacare. Obviously, we know,
in years past, there were many
votes on defunding Obamacare.
But conservatives want to put
more issues on the floor. They
want more amendments. They
don't seem to believe that
they're going to win out in the
end, but they seem to just
want at least a chance to vent.
Now, as to the endgame, I asked
Speaker Boehner today how he
thought his stepping down would
lead away from turmoil, would
lead to a more stable House
Republican Party, and his answer
at the end was, hope
springs eternal.
I think that speaks again, Judy,
to the fact that this is just a
place that is frustrated
and these are House Republicans
trying something different.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, just
quickly, it looks like Kevin
McCarthy, the majority leader,
front-runner for the
speakership, but the rest of it
is up in the air.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
I think Kevin McCarthy is
clearly the man to beat right
now. There is -- there was an
announcement I just got in the
past few minutes from Florida
Representative Daniel Webster.
He's thrown his hat in the ring.
But I don't think he is right
now going to beat out Kevin
McCarthy. The other races are
going to be rather close, and
especially to see this
conservative vs. more moderate
wing.
And I think, Judy, it's
interesting that, in the past
four years, all three of the top
three positions in the top
Republican Party will have had
new faces. That's a big deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, a
wild day at the Capitol.
Lisa Desjardins, thanks.
LISA DESJARDINS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pope Francis
delivered a strong and sweeping
call today for action to address
climate change, making the case
before a global summit in Paris
this November.
It was part of a wide-ranging
speech that took sharp aim at
materialism and warned of
further suffering for
the poorest citizens.
Hari Sreenivasan has the
story from New York City.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fresh from two
days in Washington, the pope
moved to a global audience, the
member states of the United
Nations General Assembly.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through translator): We
cannot permit ourselves to
postpone certain agendas for the
future. The future demands of us
critical and global decisions
in the face of
worldwide conflicts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In his native
Spanish, Francis called again
for a unified response to
crises,
especially threats
to the Earth itself.
POPE FRANCIS (through
translator): A true right of the
environment does exist. Any harm
done to the environment,
therefore, is a harm done to
humanity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Climate change
has been a recurring theme in
the pontiff's first U.S.
visit. And, today, he tied it to
another issue that's central to
his papacy, social and economic
injustice.
POPE FRANCIS (through
translator): The misuse and
destruction of the environment
are also
accompanied by a relentless
process of exclusion. In effect,
a selfish and boundless thirst
for power and material
prosperity leads both to the
misuse of available natural
resources
and to the exclusion of the
weak and disadvantaged.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Instead, he
insisted, the less fortunate
must become -- quote --
"dignified
agents of their own destiny,"
with basic rights to lodging,
labor and land and to education
for all. The pope also appealed
for a safer world for all
humanity, free of nuclear
weapons,
and he praised the nuclear
agreement with Iran.
But he lamented the failure to
stop the wars in the Middle East
and Eastern Europe, and
the resulting
floods of refugees.
POPE FRANCIS (through
translator): In wars and
conflicts, there are individual
persons,
our brothers and sisters, men
and women, young and old, boys
and girls who weep, suffer and
die, human beings who are easily
discarded when our only response
is to draw up lists
of problems, strategies
and disagreements.
HARI SREENIVASAN: From the U.N.,
Francis traveled to Ground Zero,
where he led a moment of silence
for those killed in the
September 11 attacks. He left a
white rose on the memorial's
reflecting
pool that's etched with
the names of those lost.
And in the site's underground
museum, he shared the stage with
clerics of various faiths.
POPE FRANCIS (through
translator): For all our
differences and disagreements,
we can
live in a world of peace. In
opposing every attempt to create
a rigid uniformity, we can
and must build unity on the
basis of our diversity of
languages, cultures and
religions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The pope also
visited a Catholic school in
East Harlem this afternoon,
then motorcaded through Central
Park, where up to 80,000 people
looked on.
The final stop of the day is
just a couple of blocks behind
me at Madison Square Garden,
where the pope will celebrate
mass with about 18,000 people.
Tomorrow, he heads to
Philadelphia
to lead a summit with thousands
of families and wrap up his U.S.
tour.
In New York City, I'm Hari
Sreenivasan for the "PBS
NewsHour" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks, Hari.
And you can explore all of our
coverage of Pope Francis' visit
online at PBS.org/NewsHour.
You can also download our new
app for iPhone or Android.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
unique mentorship to make
beautiful music; plus the
analysis
of Mark Shields
and David Brooks.
But, first, climate change was
also a top priority at the White
House today, when President
Obama and Chinese President Xi
Jinping found common ground. But
important issues still
divide them.
It was President Xi's first
state visit to Washington, and
it began with all the pageantry
the White House can muster.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: On behalf of the
American people, welcome
to the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The leaders of
the world's two largest
economies headlined cooperation
on climate change.
BARACK OBAMA: Today, I want to
commend China for announcing
that it will begin a national
market-based cap-and-trade
system to limit emissions from
some of its largest sectors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There was also
formal agreement to clamp down
on cyber-attacks. President
Xi said confrontation on the
issue is not the right choice.
XI JINPING, Chinese President
(through translator): China and
the United States should
strengthen
dialogue and cooperation. And
both governments will not engage
in or knowingly support online
theft of intellectual
properties.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Mr. Obama
said China must make good on its
promises, or the U.S. could
consider new sanctions.
BARACK OBAMA: What I have said
to President Xi and what I say
to the American people is,
the question now is, are
words followed by actions?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Beijing's
aggressive territorial claims in
the South China Sea also loomed
large in today's discussions.
President Xi called again for
cooperation, even as he defended
his nation's actions.
XI JINPING (through translator):
China is committed to the path
of peaceful development
and a foreign policy
characterized by good
neighborliness and partnership
with our neighbors.
Islands in the South China Sea
since ancient times are China's
territory. We have the right
to uphold our territorial
sovereignty and lawful and
legitimate maritime rights and
interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Chinese
leader likewise gave no ground
on his nation's human rights
policies, saying, countries have
different historical processes
and realities.
President Xi's visit to
Washington culminates tonight
with a formal state dinner at
the
White House.
For more on what they might and
might not be discussing at that
dinner, I'm joined by
John Mearsheimer, a professor at
the University of Chicago and
former Air Force officer. Susan
Shirk, she was a deputy
assistant secretary of state for
China in the Clinton
administration.
She now chairs the 21st Century
China Program at the University
of California, San Diego.
And Christopher Johnson, a
senior adviser who closely
watches China at the Center for
Strategic and
International Studies.
Welcome, all three,
to the program.
Let's talk first about what was
accomplished, China signing on
to this climate change
agreement,
so-called cap-and-trade system,
Susan Shirk, wherein they limit
how much an industry can
pollute. How
significant is this?
SUSAN SHIRK, University of
California, San Diego: Well,
it's very significant because
air pollution has become a
domestic political problem in
China.
And the Chinese leadership has,
therefore, gotten very serious
about its commitments
on climate change, because these
two issues are very much
related. And to see China and
the United States both making
strong commitments on climate
change going into the U.N.
climate
summit...
JUDY WOODRUFF: In...
SUSAN SHIRK: ... in December is
-- sends a message that the two
countries can cooperate
when their interests are
as aligned as this one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christopher
Johnson, you see it as
important?
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: Absolutely. I think
so.
And, as Susan pointed out, the
sort of message it sends for the
Paris conference is really
the important piece here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Mearsheimer,
what would you add on that?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER, University of
Chicago: I agree, but this was
the easy one.
The problem is that there are a
number of different issues here
that really matter,
some more than this, and on a
lot of those issues, not much
progress was expected or
made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we
want to get to those.
But I do want to ask you about
cyber-spying, John Mearsheimer.
The agreement they said
they have made to clamp down on
cyber-spying, an agreement on
the theft of intellectual
property, how important
is all that?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Well, it's
very important to emphasize that
there was no agreement on
what one might call traditional
spying via cyber, so we can
continue to spy on them in
the national security realm, and
they can continue to spy on us.
But where there was an agreement
is on the economic front, and
they were obviously stealing
lots of our economic secrets,
and we were not stealing hardly
any of theirs, and the
end result is that the agreement
they came up with, if they can
enforce it, will be a
good agreement for
the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christopher
Johnson, how do you see that?
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON: I agree.
I think that the main value in
the agreement really is that it
starts to put some parameters
around the discussion. And I
think what will see next, From
the U.S. point of view, is
that when we have evidence --
and we will have evidence -- of
this economic espionage,
we will then go to the Chinese
and say, under your commitments
of this new agreement, we
expect to see prosecutions on
your side. And if those don't
happen, then we will move to
sanction those firms or
individuals that have been
involved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Shirk, what
about the areas now where they
didn't make much headway,
China's territorial ambitions,
human rights? Was much expected
was going to happen in those
areas anyway?
SUSAN SHIRK: No, I don't think
we expected much to happen, and
not much did.
On the -- China's maritime
claims in the South China Sea,
Xi Jinping has become so
strongly
invested in those issues as a
focal point of domestic
nationalism, and it's a great
way for him to get people to
rally around the flag and rally
around him at a time when
the economy is growing more
slowly, there are potential
domestic discontents.
So, it's just too attractive a
kind of -- it leads to tension
with your neighbors and tension
with the U.S., but it
works for Him at home.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Mearsheimer,
so how much of a problem is it
for the United States,
for U.S. allies like Japan,
Vietnam, that they didn't get
much done in that area?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Well, the
South China Sea is a huge
problem for the United States,
because
our credibility in the region
really matters, and it's at
stake in this particular case.
The Japanese are watching us
very carefully, because the
Japanese depend on us for
security,
and it's our nuclear umbrella
that's over their heads, so they
want to know how tough
we're going to be with the
Chinese if the Chinese begin to
push. And the Chinese are
pushing in the South China Sea.
They have very ambitious goals,
and the United States has really
not drawn any lines in the
sand up to this point. And I
think at some point, we're going
to have to do that, and
I think it's going to get
very messy at that time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christopher
Johnson, is the U.S. any closer
to drawing a line?
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON: I think
we're getting there. I think
we're getting there.
But it's important that when we
think about what China is doing
in the South China Sea,
as John was suggesting, we have
to think about it in the broader
context of China's broader
maritime strategy
that is emerging.
And the message they're sending
to the region and to the United
States is, effectively,
our forces will operate at times
of our choosing, perhaps even
with impunity, in this area out
to the so-called Second Island
Chain of Guam, and the rest of
you have to accept it. And
if you don't want to accept it,
we care more about this space
than you do.
And the Chinese are trying to
get, for the first time in their
history, some maritime
strategic depth
around their country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's --
let's broaden this out, Susan
Shirk. the relationship between
the two men, let's -- overall
China-U.S. relations, are they
any better coming out of these
two
days of meetings,
do you believe?
(CROSSTALK)
SUSAN SHIRK: They're
not any worse.
I wouldn't say this was a home
run kind of summit, as -- last
November, we had a summit
in Beijing where the two leaders
made some -- three sets of very
substantive agreements.
And Xi Jinping, because he was
the host then, he really bent
over backwards to make that
a successful summit. Here, he
was coming, he was getting the
state visit. He already
had it, and he didn't have --
he didn't want to give as much.
And these issues are tough for
him. So, I don't say this was
great. And the relationship
has become a lot more
competitive since I served in
government at the end of the
Clinton
administration. So -- and I
think this is not going to turn
that around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Mearsheimer,
a lot of reporting about the
efforts by President Xi
to consolidate his power in
China. What do you see in the
months to come in the overall
U.S.-China relationship?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Well, I think
that he has a significant
domestic problem at home, for
two reasons.
One is that he doesn't have a
lot of legitimacy, in the sense
that communism, which is the
ruling ideology, doesn't have
much power these days. And,
furthermore...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean even
with the Chinese people?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Even
with the Chinese people.
And, as a result, he's been
playing the nationalism card.
And that causes all sorts of
problems,
because it forces him to be more
aggressive in foreign policy. At
the same time, he's
having significant economic
problems at home. And it's very
hard to predict where this train
is headed, but these economic
problems could get worse. And
that may force him to be more
aggressive on the foreign policy
front, for the purposes of
trying to keep those centrifugal
forces at home at bay.
So, this could get messy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You know, John --
the point that John makes,
Christopher Johnson, reminding
us about the Chinese economy,
the difficulty they have had
with their markets, the effect
that has had on the rest of the
world, there really wasn't much
mention of that today.
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON: Yes, and
that is what was surprising.
I think it would have been much
more helpful. I think this was a
missed opportunity. If
both presidents had taken the
opportunity they had to reassure
global equity markets
that the two countries are
working together to stabilize
these markets, that would have
been very, very useful, and I
think that was a missed
opportunity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much is known
about how well the two men, the
two leaders get along
with each other, and does that
really make a difference?
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON: Not much is
known. I think it certainly
makes a difference.
I think what we can say is, they
have worked hard on their
relationship. And that goes
back to their first meeting at
Sunnylands in California, where
they had this shirtsleeve
summit and so on. I think you
can characterize the
relationship as not close, but
respectful
and candid.
And my sense is that when they
have -- especially when they
have these more informal
settings
-- like, last night, there was a
two-hour, almost three-hour
private dinner between the
two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Small dinner.
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON: Yes. Today
was just the formal mechanics.
Last night was where they
really discussed these issues.
And I think they have had
in-depth conversations about
each other's political systems,
about
some of these regional
architectural regions that John
has referenced. So, they do have
candid discussions, but the
relationship clearly is not
close.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's one
that we all will continue to
focus on.
Christopher Johnson, Susan Shirk
and John Mearsheimer, thank you,
all three.
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Thank you.
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON: Thank you.
SUSAN SHIRK: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Capitol Hill was
a historic place to be this
week, with a papal visit
and the surprise resignation
of House Speaker Boehner.
Of course, those are the main
topics for our turn to Shields
and brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark Shields and New
York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, Mark, surprised
about Boehner?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: But, as Lisa
reported to you from the Hill,
the speaker faced what is a
vote of no confidence. He would
have prevailed. He would have
survived, but it would have
showed him weakened within his
own caucus. This was among the
Republican members. So,
I think he made the decision
to go out on his own terms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, a
complete shock for you?
DAVID BROOKS: No, saw it coming
months and months and months
ago.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: No, obviously,
since the day he walked in the
door, he's had this challenge,
and it's grown more, but I don't
think anybody saw it coming in
this way.
Obviously, I think the papal
visit had -- on the timing, had
an effect. There is a beautiful
piece by Robert Costa of The
Washington Post talking about
how, the night before, Costa,
a reporter, was with him on the
balcony, and Boehner was saying
the pope stood right here,
right here, and he asked me to
pray for him. And he was so
moved.
And so there's an element of
uplift, and might as well do the
right thing. And this specific
act was the right thing. Paul
Ryan called it a selfless act.
And I think it really is
a selfless act. It spares us
from a potential government
shutdown. It helps the
institution.
It helps his party from the
fallout from a government
shutdown.
And so I think it's a beautiful
act. Now, over the long term,
the downside of Boehner
was that he wasn't that
imaginative and the Republicans
weren't that aggressive in
putting
together a lot of policies, an
alternative to Obamacare, a
health care, a tax plan,
whatever.
But he did know reality. He
could see reality around him. He
knew the craft of politics
and how you craft a deal,
especially these budget deals.
Some of his critics don't seem
to see that reality, that they
don't control the White House or
the supermajority in the
Senate. And they don't seem to
respect the craft of politics.
And if they ever get in
actual power, they are going
to be introduced it to rudely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, David is
saying it avoids turmoil, but,
in fact, Mark, there is going
to be turmoil as they figure out
who their leadership is and they
sort -- because it
seems to me the conservatives
still want the same things, even
with a bunch of new leaders.
MARK SHIELDS: You're right,
Judy. It postpones turmoil,
instead of having it
immediately.
John Boehner was never really a
good fit with this particular
caucus of fire-eaters. John
Boehner was a legislator. He
liked politicians. He was good
at his craft. Perhaps they
became
suspicious when John Boehner, in
2001, cooperated. He actually
practiced what the pope preached
to the Congress. He cooperated
and compromised with Ted Kennedy
and George Miller, two ranking
Democrats, on George Bush,
President George W. Bush's
signature proposal of Leave No
Child
Behind.
And there were questions about
him. He was willing to pass a
highway bill. He was willing
to pass an immigration bill. He
was against closing down the
government. He was willing
to raise the debt ceiling. This
raised suspicions within the
true believer caucus, and which
may be two dozen, it may be four
dozen. And it's not enough to
pass anything.
And they're just -- quite
frankly, all they did was -- I
think John Boehner -- I think
David is right -- yesterday was
the day of his life. He had --
for 21 years...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pope there.
MARK SHIELDS: ... he had made
the effort -- he began when Tom
Foley was speaker and John
Paul II was pope -- to get the
Congress to invite him. And we
never would have heard
this remarkable pastor yesterday
with the message of comfort the
afflicted and afflict
the comfortable yesterday and a
national audience but for John
Boehner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, so do
things change now? Does more get
done, does less get done,
is it the same? What's going to
be different about the way
things work?
DAVID BROOKS: I think a lot is
going to be the same, assuming
Kevin McCarthy takes over.
He's not that totally different
than Boehner. He's happy. He's a
happy guy. He's a charming
guy, right now a little more in
favor with the very
conservatives, but he's still
basically
a reality-based politician. And
he will understand how to try to
do deals.
So, I think he will get a little
bit of a breather. But the
people who believe that
they're in office not to pass
legislation, but merely to
express their id are still
there.
And so that conflict
will still be there.
And then, more structurally --
Elaine Kamarck of the Brookings
Institution had a good piece
today saying that the office of
the speaker is weaker because
there's less earmarks, so
they can't give away pork
projects to control people. The
parties are weaker because of
campaign finance. And there's
just a lot of free-spirited
individualism in the House now.
And people can go off
freelancing off on their own.
And so the institutional power
is a little
weaker. So, even when a Democrat
comes in, I think we're going to
see a lot more fractiousness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even when a
Democrat comes in? You mean
even...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I
mean, it's different.
I think both parties are
ideologically polarized. The
Republican -- some rump of the
Republican
Party doesn't believe in
politics. I think most of the
Democratic Party does believe
in politics. They're the party
of government. They believe in
government.
And, so, in some sense, the
Republican Party can get a
little more extreme over
tactics,
but I think it will be hard for
speakers in the future to
control people, just because,
if you have got a super PAC, if
you got some independent
expenditures, it's hard to
impose
discipline anymore on the body.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, does more
get done, does less get done?
How do you see it?
MARK SHIELDS: Less gets
done, Judy, I believe.
And could I be rude and just say
that there are probably four
dozen members of the House
Republican Caucus who do not
believe in government? And they
are not -- they have never
accepted
the responsibility of
the governing party.
I mean, John Boehner accepted
the fact that the Republicans
are the majority party in
the House and the Senate.
Therefore, we have a
responsibility to keep
government operating,
not to close it down, to fund
it, to compromise, to get the
votes necessary to pass the
legislation
required. And there are four
dozen who say, hell no, if it
does close down, great, that's
good, that's what
we're here about.
And I don't know how you govern
with that. David's absolutely
right. Kevin McCarthy is
one of the most gregarious
members of the House. He knows
his colleagues on the House
-- on the Republican side. He
knows their kids' names. He
knows their wives' names.
He loves their company.
It will give him a two-month
honeymoon, until the talk shows
start in, and the right-wing
network starts up, and this four
dozen caucus who -- four dozen
of them, three dozen, or
whatever they are, are just --
they are absolutely
nonnegotiable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some have called
them the heck no -- stronger
word -- of this caucus.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's interesting
that, David, this comes the day
after Pope Francis comes
to speak to a joint session and
talks about, we need to end
polarization, we need to work
together. What about the pope's
message at the White House in
Washington? What did you
take away from it?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, I thought it's so clear
how countercultural he is. We
have ideological fights. He's
anti-ideological.
He's personalist. Somebody once
said, souls are not saved in
bundles, and he's with each
individual human being.
I loved the moment, little girl
on the street, she came up to
his caravan, and he embraced
her. That was a moment, the pope
and the individual. And so he
represents community an ethos of
community and uplift, which is
just different than our
horizontal politics.
It's a vertical axis he's on.
And so, whether you're
Republican or Democrat, I think
everybody
felt uplifted, and both uplifted
by his example and his humility,
but also humbled by -- he
believes that the church is a
hospital for the souls, and so
he offered that as well.
And I would say, in general, we
can have scorecards of how
political he was. I thought the
political
speeches were fine. The U.N., it
was fine, and one agrees with
it. But some of the religious
statements he made at the homily
up at the Catholic Basilica here
in town in Washington
were beautiful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And the religious
statements were really
profoundly beautiful. And I
would
hate to see them get drowned
out, as we weigh whether he was
a little more anti-gay marriage
or pro-immigration, the
political stuff. The religious
stuff was really quite
beautiful,
I thought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you
mainly take away from this pope
and this...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I
agree with David.
There are a couple of things
that -- I was with somebody who
had been at John Kennedy's
funeral, and said it was the
closest thing they had seen to a
Washington event since
John Kennedy's funeral, in this
sense. Most events in
Washington, other than
inaugurals,
which are a celebration, most of
them, people come in great
numbers to protest, for redress
of grievances.
This was a joyful crowd. They
waited for hours, literally
hours, to see him for four or
five,
six seconds away, and walked
away satisfied. And it was a
joyful and very considerate
crowd.
It lacked the usual Washington
elbows: Do you know who I am? I
should be up front.
That was missing. I thought the
speech to Congress was magic, in
the sense that just
watching the feeling in that
room. There was a sense of awe
about the man. But -- and I
agree with the scorecard, as to
-- which he did. He walks where
he chooses to walk. He
doesn't prim. He doesn't cockle.
He says the same whatever
audience he's speaking to.
And the thing about the man that
just strikes me is, history is
written by winners, and
it's written about winners. It's
written about victorious
generals and princes and
powerful
presidents.
And what -- as MDNM John Carr
said to you last MDNM -- John
Carr, Georgetown University
-- this man's an outsider. He
looks at the world from the
bottom up and from the outside
in. And after the speech,
instead of accepting the lunch
where all the power brokers of
Washington
come to lionize you on Capitol
Hill and get all the toasts, he
went down with 300 homeless
people, and he fed with
them and ate with them.
And it was just -- it was
marvelous. And he compared -- he
pointed out that Jesus was
born homeless. It was just a
marvelous -- so it's the
eloquence of his symbols, as
well
as his language.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does it linger,
David? Does something last? Is
something now embedded
in this city and anywhere else
as a result of this? Or is this
a fleeting moment?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well, the
lion won't lie down with the
lamb.
But I think he leaves a residue
on people. I think it's a
profound memory with people,
and it's a moment of uplift for
people. And so I think a lot of
nonbelievers were moved.
A lot of lapsed Catholics were
moved. A lot of Jews and
Protestants were moved. Everyone
was sort of moved.
And that emotion leaves a
residue. But I think, also, for
a lot of people, I think the big
effect -- and this is Mark's
church -- a lot of people, lives
will be changed. Some tens
of thousands will go to a mass,
and their lives will be changed.
And we emphasize the man so
much, but what he's saying is
the product of 2,000 years
of teaching, of thought, of
prayer. And he's the current
exemplar. We sort of
overemphasize
the individual and
underemphasize the institution,
I think, throughout this visit.
But for some large number of
people, this will be a turning
point in their lives. And
that's sort of worth
celebrating. In Philadelphia, or
in Madison Square Garden
tonight, some
people, this will be the moment
something very fundamental
shifts in their lives. And
politics rarely achieves that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It certainly
isn't something we see very
often.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields, we thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We take a look
now at a very different
Chinese-American collaboration,
this time in the
world of the arts.
Ever since a ban on Western
music was lifted in China almost
40 years ago, the country
has produced a number of artists
for elite music conservatories
in the West.
Jeffrey Brown has the story of
one such pianist who's taken the
leap from prodigy to
international
superstar with the help of an
American mentor and a former
prodigy himself.
This story was produced in
collaboration with public TV
station KQED.
JEFFREY BROWN: He is 70, the
grandson of Yiddish theater
stars, music director of the San
Francisco
Symphony, and a major figure on
the classical music scene for
five decades. She is 28, a
virtuoso from China and a
spectacular new presence on the
international circuit.
Michael Tilson Thomas and Yuja
Wang have been collaborators, as
conductor and pianist, for
11 years now.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS, Music
Director, San Francisco
Symphony: This is a little part
of a Schubert Rondo, which is
subtitled, "Our Friendship is
Unchanging." It's forever.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Up close, it's
clearly a relationship based on
musicianship and a sense of
humor.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: There is
an element of excitement and
danger to it, because it
reminds me sometimes as if you
were watching the circus and
you're watching a trapeze act.
Somebody is jumping and doing
flips in the air, but also
somebody is catching the person
who is doing that.
JEFFREY BROWN: And who
is who in this case?
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: In
this case, I'm the catcher.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
And you're the?
YUJA WANG, Pianist:
I jump around.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: You jump around.
Yuja Wang took her first piano
lesson at age 6. Soon after, she
was accepted at the Central
Conservatory of Music in
Beijing. At 14, she left China
without her parents to study
classical
music, first in Calgary and then
at the prestigious Curtis School
of Music in Philadelphia, from
which she graduated at age 21.
These days, when not on the
road, Wang lives in New York, as
addicted as the next
20-something
to her digital devices.
When you put on the headphones,
you're listening to?
YUJA WANG: It really depends on
my mood, because, like -- today,
I feel like Brahms, or today
I feel like Eminem.
JEFFREY BROWN: Brahms
and Eminem, right?
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: They go
together. Yes. Yes.
Her fiery, youthful style and
sheer talent quickly attracted
attention in traditional
classic music circles and
beyond. YouTube videos, like
this one of Rimsky-Korsakov's
"Flight of the Bumblebee" on the
Medici TV site have gained
millions of views.
For his part, Michael Tilson
Thomas was himself a classical
music prodigy. In Los Angeles,
he played piano alongside
legends like Igor Stravinsky and
Aaron Copland. When he first
heard then 17-year-old Yuja Wang
play, he recognized some
familiar traits.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: There's
that expression, it takes one to
know one. And there is that
certain thing I spotted in her
from the beginning of, ah,
right. And it was remarkable,
because
here was this very young woman
playing, and she was listening.
She was listening to the
harmonies and she was playing in
a way that was following and
sympathetic, as well as
asserting herself.
JEFFREY BROWN: We watched the
two rehearse Beethoven's Piano
Concerto Number Four with
the San Francisco Symphony.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: And then
kind of resolving in -- does
that sort of make sense for you?
YUJA WANG: Yes, but it's
hard to control the sound.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: I know.
It's hard playing -- playing
slow and quiet is the hardest
thing,
for a thoroughbred
like you, anyway.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Hours later,
issues resolved, they performed
for a packed house in Davies
Hall.
YUJA WANG: We played it three
years ago, and now we're playing
it again. And I feel like
it's more relaxed and more free.
And he caught up on that in the
rehearsal like after five
pages. It was just so sensitive.
And it just had this really
subtle adjustments right away.
And he will tell the orchestra,
and they change the sounds, the
tone, the phrasing. Everything
just kind of takes care
of itself, because the overall
mood and atmosphere is a little
different.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mentoring, in
this case, takes many forms,
including, over the years,
teaching
Wang, a young woman constantly
traveling the world, how to
prepare healthy meals.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: We're
going to make croutons. No, no,
no, wait. Don't put them
in yet.
YUJA WANG: No? Oh, OK.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: You're
not done with them. Take them
out.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: But, beyond the
salad-making, Tilson Thomas
says, there's the deeper
satisfaction
to his mentoring role.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: It's
essential for me, the sense of
contact with a new brilliant
spirit of another generation,
with whom I feel so much in
common.
JEFFREY BROWN: But
why is it essential?
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: Because
it reminds me, too, of the
relationship I had with mentors
of mine who were 50 years older
than I. My major piano teacher
was a pupil of a guy called
Moriz Rosenthal, who had been a
pupil of Liszt, who was a pupil
of Czerny, who was a pupil
of Beethoven.
JEFFREY BROWN: With Yuja Wang,
along with her musical prowess,
her style, very much
including clothing, has also
gotten plenty of attention, and
sometimes raised eyebrows
in the tradition-bound
world of classical music.
Of an orange mini-dress she wore
for a performance at the
Hollywood Bowl, The Los Angeles
Times
wrote -- quote -- "Had there
been any less of the dress, the
Bowl might have been forced
to restrict admission to
any music lover under 18."
Do you like to make a statement
with your clothes, as well as
with your music?
YUJA WANG: Well, the clothes
goes with the music. Like,
tonight, it's Beethoven. It's
something elegant. Tomorrow, I
will have something very jarring
and blatant for Bartok.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: I have
certain ideas of where that
borderline is of just how daring
her fashion sense can be
relative to the piece that she's
playing.
JEFFREY BROWN: But Tilson Thomas
also recognizes an added
benefit.
MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS: She's
very appealing to young people,
of course, because she is
so young, she's so attractive.
Her playing is so brilliant. All
the controversy concerning
the way she appears,
fashion-wise, this is all part
of it, and yet there is no one
who
remotely suggested that anything
about her music-making was less
than totally serious.
JEFFREY BROWN: Soon after our
visit, Michael Tilson Thomas,
Yuja Wang, and the San Francisco
Symphony took their show on the
road for an extended European
tour.
After that, Tilson Thomas
returns to San Francisco to
launch a new season. And Wang
continues
her peripatetic musical ways
with a new album of music by
Maurice Ravel out in October.
From San Francisco, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the "PBS NewsHour"
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow.
And on the "NewsHour" online: A
young man's impassioned Facebook
post went viral last
week after he described being
called a racial slur on his
college campus. Payton Head said
he could remain silent, or he
could speak up. He chose the
latter, and he challenged
his classmates at the University
of Missouri to do the same. The
political science major
and student body president wrote
about what inspired his plea.
Plus, chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
reports after meeting with
Iranian President Hassan
Rouhani. You can read her blog
on our home page.
You can find that and more on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening. Here's a
preview:
GWEN IFILL: The pope takes the
world by storm. The U.S. and
Chinese presidents talk
cyber-crime
and military maneuvering. And
House Speaker John Boehner's
resignation bombshell -- all
that, plus an update on the
slippery world of 2016 politics
tonight on "Washington Week"
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" Saturday: faith,
service, sacrifice. Meet the new
generation
of those entering
the priesthood.
NARRATOR: Eighteen-year-old Phil
Tran began his studies this
fall. The oldest of six children
in a Vietnamese-American family,
Tran was immersed in Catholic
teachings from a young
age.
PHIL TRAN, Seminarian: I have
always had people going up to
me, telling me I would make a
good priest.
NARRATOR: Still, when he
finished high school, Tran
planned on studying mechanical
engineering
at Philadelphia's Drexel
University, where he was offered
a partial scholarship.
PHIL TRAN: I love math, I love
science, I love engineering, but
I couldn't see myself
enjoying that for the rest of my
life, when I know that I could
be touching people's lives
in a more direct way, in a way
that God might be calling me to
do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.